feat: add new Tools Dashboard blog (#1265)
asyncapi/website: pages/blog/new-asyncapi-tools-page.md

---
title: 'New Tools Dashboard for AsyncAPI'
date: 2023-01-30T06:00:00+01:00
type: Communication
tags:
  - Automation
  - JSON Schema

> cover: /img/posts/new-asyncapi-tools-page/cover.webp

Reviewer: Really struggling with seeing an apple product (soooo enterprise) for this blog post... i almost feel like it would be more interesting if we used [a picture of tools such as this one](https://www.dewalt.com/products/hand-tools) ... what do you think 🧐 💭 ?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/19964402/215650034-cfda72b7-b04b-4f27-9115-15c1611c04bf.png)

---
title: 'New Tools Dashboard for AsyncAPI'

> date: 2023-01-30T06:00:00+01:00

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2023-02-14T06:00:00+01:00
```

type: Communication
tags:
  - Automation
  - JSON Schema
cover: /img/posts/new-asyncapi-tools-page/cover.webp
authors:
  - name: Akshat Nema
    photo: /img/avatars/akshatnema.webp
    link: https://twitter.com/AksNema
    byline: AsyncAPI Maintainer and Dev Akshat Nema

> excerpt: "We haven't come up with some exciting features in AsyncAPI in recent, but now we come up with something new and special"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
excerpt: "Announcing our newly released AsyncAPI tools dashboard!"
```

so the only problem is that the expert didn't mention what the blog is about AT ALL... you want to make sure to include a reference to the core topic in your expert sentence ✌🏽

featured: true
---

> We already know that the present list of tools used inside AsyncAPI is presented on [AsyncAPI Tools Overview](/docs/tools) and it is manually maintained inside the Github repository. All the tools are sorted according to the different categories in which they are used and maintained by the contributors. But we don't have, how to filter the tools according to our interest 🤔, like languages, technolgies used in it, open source tools, etc. Also, what if you want to add your tool in the list, what you will do 🤔? Will make a PR?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We already know that the present list of tools used inside AsyncAPI is presented on [AsyncAPI Tools Overview](/docs/tools) and it is manually maintained inside the GitHub repository. All the tools are sorted according to the different categories in which they are used and maintained by the contributors. But we don't have a way to filter the tools according to our interest 🤔, like languages, technologies used in it, open-source tools, etc. Also, what if you want to add your tool to the list, what you will do 🤔? Do you have to create a PR?
```

> What if I say, you don't need to make a mess of PR now 😉. Yepp, we introduce you with something new to add tools in our website. For this, stay tuned in the blog 👇.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What if I say, you don't need to make a mess of PR now 😉. Yep, we're introducing a new way to add tools to our website! Keep reading below to learn all about it👇.
```

# AsyncAPI Tool File

> We have introduced a new concept of the `.asyncapi-tool` file which describes the type and details of a tool related to AsyncAPI. This file will follow certain schema and fields to describe your tool appropriately according to the needs of a user and it will then automatically be added to our website within a week. But the question comes, where this file will exist? Inside AsyncAPI repositories? Definitely not! Here comes the twist, this file will be created and maintained in your Tool's repository, and it won't ask for our approval. This file will follow a certain schema that you have to follow to successfully and appropriately add your tool to our brand new [AsyncAPI Tools Dashboard](/tools). The [proper schema of the file is described here](https://github.com/asyncapi/website/blob/master/scripts/tools/tools-schema.json). You can use the tools like the [Online JSON Validator](https://www.liquid-technologies.com/online-json-schema-validator) to validate your JSON data for Tools against the schema given above. For a more detailed explanation, you can refer to our [official `.asyncapi-tool` file documentation](https://github.com/asyncapi/community/blob/master/new-tool-documentation.md). 

Reviewer 2: side comment about style, but the decision is yours if that should be changed

there is a huge amount of `will` in this paragraph but you do not write about future but present situation, and it feels weird to read:
- `But the question comes, where this file will exist?` why not `But the question is, where you should place such a file?`
- `This file will follow certain schema and fields to describe your tool appropriately according to the needs of a user and it will then automatically be added to our website within a week` but why not `You create such a file with a set of different information that describes your tool and then within a week such information is added to the AsyncAPI website`

in general I always thing that in articles it is good to address the reader directly and avoid `will` unless you really write about the future

> We have introduced a new concept of `.asyncapi-tool` file which describes the type and details of a tool related to AsyncAPI. This file will follow certain schema and fields to describe your tool appropriately according to the needs of a user and it will then automatically being added to our website within a week. But the question comes, where this file will exist? inside AsyncAPI repositories? Definitely not!. Here comes the twist, this file will be created and maintained in your Tool's repository, and it won't ask for our approval. This file will follow certain schema which you have to follow to successfully and appropriately add your tool to our brand new [Tools Dashboard](/tools). The proper schema of the file is described [here](https://github.com/asyncapi/website/blob/master/scripts/tools/tools-schema.json). You can use the tools like [Online JSON Validator](https://www.liquid-technologies.com/online-json-schema-validator) to validate your JSON data for Tool against the schema given above. For more detailed explanation, you can refer to our [official documentation](https://github.com/asyncapi/community/blob/master/new-tool-documentation.md) of `.asyncapi-tool` file. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have introduced a new concept of the `.asyncapi-tool` file which describes the type and details of a tool related to AsyncAPI. This file will follow certain schema and fields to describe your tool appropriately according to the needs of a user and it will then automatically be added to our website within a week. But the question comes, where this file will exist? Inside AsyncAPI repositories? Definitely not! Here comes the twist, this file will be created and maintained in your Tool's repository, and it won't ask for our approval. This file will follow a certain schema that you have to follow to successfully and appropriately add your tool to our brand new [AsyncAPI Tools Dashboard](/tools). The [proper schema of the file is described here](https://github.com/asyncapi/website/blob/master/scripts/tools/tools-schema.json). You can use the tools like the [Online JSON Validator](https://www.liquid-technologies.com/online-json-schema-validator) to validate your JSON data for Tools against the schema given above. For a more detailed explanation, you can refer to our [official `.asyncapi-tool` file documentation](https://github.com/asyncapi/community/blob/master/new-tool-documentation.md). 
```

Improving links for accessibility, so that screenreader users can tell where the links take them.

## Tool File Structure

Here's the sample `.asyncapi-tool` file structure, which can be used to structurise your tool configuration.

```JSON
{
  "title": "ZenWave Code Generator",
  "description": "DDD and API-First for Event-Driven Microservices",
  "links": {
    "websiteUrl": "https://zenwave360.github.io/",
    "docsUrl": "https://zenwave360.github.io/zenwave-code-generator/plugins/asyncapi-spring-cloud-streams3/",
    "repoUrl": "https://github.com/zenwave360/zenwave-code-generator"
  },
  "filters": {
    "language": "Java",
    "technology": [
      "Maven",
      "Spring Cloud Streams"
    ],
    "categories": [
      "code-generator",
      "dsl",
      "mocking-and-testing",
      "cli"
    ],
    "hasCommercial": false
  }
}
```

> This file structure should be used to insert your tool in website. The fields specified above are explained below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This file structure should be used to insert your tool into the website. The fields specified above are explained below:
```

> - **`title`** - Specifies the title or name of the Tool. Remember this name will be used as official name of your tool in website.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **`title`** - Specifies the title or name of the Tool. Remember this name will be used as the official name of your tool on the website.
```

> - **`description`** - Specifies the description of the tool you want to add. Make sure it should be precise, upto 30 words only.
> - **`links`** - Object which contains important links related to the tool.
>   - **`websiteUrl`** - This is an optional field which specifies URL of the website of the tool.
>   - **`docsUrl`** - This is an optional field which specifies URL of the documentation of the tool.
>   - **`repoUrl`** - This is an optional field which specifies URL of the Github repository of the tool.
> - **`filters`** - Object which contains various fields like language, technologies, categories to provide information about the tool.
>   - **`language`** - Specifies primary Language in which the tool has been created. There are predefined languages listed in our documentation which are available right now and will be expanded to add new languages if needed.
>   - **`technology`** - Specifies the list of technologies which are used to create the tool. There are predefined technologies listed in our documentation which are available right now and will be expanded to add new languages if needed.
>   - **`categories`** - Specifies the list of categories which defines the type of tool. There are predefined categories listed in our documentation which can be used to list down your tool under proper category.
>   - **`hasCommercial`** - Specifies whether the tool is a commercial product or is open source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **`description`** - Specify your the tool description.  It should be precise, up to 30 words only.
- **`links`** - Object which contains important links related to the tool.
  - **`websiteUrl`** - This is an optional field that specifies the URL of the tool's website.
  - **`docsUrl`** - This is an optional field that specifies the URL of the tool's documentation.
  - **`repoUrl`** - This is an optional field that specifies the URL of the tool's GitHub repository.
- **`filters`** - Object which contains various fields like language, technologies, and categories to provide information about the tool.
  - **`language`** - Specifies the primary Language in which the tool has been created. There are predefined languages listed in our documentation that are available right now and will be expanded to add new languages if needed.
  - **`technology`** - Specifies the list of technologies that are used to create the tool. There are predefined technologies listed in our documentation that are available right now and will be expanded to add new languages if needed.
  - **`categories`** - Specifies the list of categories that defines the type of tool. There are predefined categories listed in our documentation that can be used to list down your tool under the proper category.
  - **`hasCommercial`** - Specifies whether the tool is a commercial product or is open source.
```

ya, I decided it was easier to fix all the bullet points in one go 😂✌🏽

> The predefined list of technologies can be found in our repository and are listed as:

Reviewer 2: I think that instead of listing to `js` files you should link to the json schema that contains this info. IMHO we need one source of truth and it is JSON Schema

Author: The problem is that if I will specify the JSON schema along with line number, it will be not be maintainable as schema may change in future and the line numbers will differ. So, it's better that if we have the file specified for languages, technologies and categories that are being used in script, we should specify this in the blog too. WDYT?

Reviewer 2: imho you do not have to add link to specific line. JSON Schema is not that big, it is easy to find related info.

I just think it is easier to always send back to json schema, but I will not argue about it for sure 😆

Author: So, for both items in the list, we should place same link as of JSON Schema/

Reviewer 2: yup

- [Languages and Technologies](https://github.com/asyncapi/website/blob/master/scripts/tools/tags-color.js)
- [Categories](https://github.com/asyncapi/website/blob/master/scripts/tools/categorylist.js)

# AsyncAPI Tools Dashboard

> Ohh! wait a minute, have I told you about new Tools Dashboard? Then, let me present you with brand new and astonishing AsyncAPI Tools Dashboard, which has list of Tools presented in the form of cards. Do checkout that out right now - [AsyncAPI Tools Dashboard](/tools). Preview of the UI is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ohh! Wait a minute, have I told you about the new AsyncAPI Tools Dashboard? Then, let me present you with a brand new and astonishing AsyncAPI Tools Dashboard, which has a list of Tools presented in the form of cards. Do check it out right now - [AsyncAPI Tools Dashboard](/tools). The preview of the UI is as follows:
```

> ![Dashboard UI](/img/posts/new-asyncapi-tools-page/dashboard-preview.webp)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![AsyncAPI Dashboard UI](/img/posts/new-asyncapi-tools-page/dashboard-preview.webp)
```

> The Dashboard consists of various features like the overall information about the tools inside ToolCard, filters to sort out the tools according to your needs, and search for tools specific to its name and type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Dashboard consists of various features like the overall information about the tools inside the ToolCard, filters to sort out the tools according to your needs, and a search bar for finding tools specific to name/type.
```

## Tool Card

> Taking the Tools Card under consideration, you have following sections to detail about a Tool:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Taking the Tools Card under consideration, you have the following sections to detail about a Tool:
```

> ![Tools Card](/img/posts/new-asyncapi-tools-page/tool-preview.webp)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![AsyncAPI Tools Card](/img/posts/new-asyncapi-tools-page/tool-preview.webp)
```

<ol>
  <li> Specifies the Name of the Tool.</li>
  <li> Specifies whether the Tool is Free to use or requires commercial access to use it.</li>
  <li> Specifies the Description of the Tool. Clicking on the `Show More` button will open a small box to show full description of the Tool.</li>
  <li> Specifies the Primary Language of the Tool in which it is built.</li>
  <li> Specifies the list of Technologies used to create the Tool.</li>
  <li> <b>View on Github</b> Button that directs the user to the Github repository of the Tool.</li>
  <li> <b>Visit Website</b> Button that directs the user to the official website of the Tool.</li>
  <li> <b>Visit Docs</b> Button that directs the user to the official Docs of the Tool.</li>
</ol>

## Filters for Tools

> The Dashboard also contain various filters to search for a specific Tool according to your needs. You can now search according to the Name, Languages, Technologies, Categories, etc.. as provided in respective dropdowns and radio buttons. Filters are mostly divided in 2 sections - Filter Menu and Search bar. The use of each menu is explained below under respective subheadings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Dashboard also contains various filters to search for a specific Tool according to your needs. You can now search according to the Name, Languages, Technologies, Categories, and more, as provided in respective dropdowns and radio buttons. Filters are mostly divided into 2 sections - Filter Menu and Search bar. The use of each menu is explained below under respective subheadings.
```

> ![Filters Preview](/img/posts/new-asyncapi-tools-page/filters.webp)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![AsyncAPI tool's filters preview](/img/posts/new-asyncapi-tools-page/filters.webp)
```

### Filter Menu

Taking the Tools Filter Menu under consideration, you have following filters to search a Tool:

> ![Filter Menu](/img/posts/new-asyncapi-tools-page/filter-menu.webp)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![AsyncAPI tool's filters menu](/img/posts/new-asyncapi-tools-page/filter-menu.webp)
```

> <ol>
>   <li> This radio filter button allows to search for either free tools available on internet or Github, or search for the Paid Tools.</li>
>   <li> The slider filter button allows to search for the tools owned or maintained by AsyncAPI organization. </li>
>   <li> The <b>Language Filter</b> allows you to select the languages from the dropdown on which you want to search for Tools. </li>
>   <li> The <b>Technology Filter</b> allows you to select the technologies from the dropdown on which you want to search for Tools. </li>
>   <li> The <b>Clear Filters</b> button allows you to clear all filters inside the Filters Modal and will show you all the tools of selected categories (or all categories).</li>
> </ol>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<ol>
  <li> This radio filter button allows you to search for either free tools available on the internet or GitHub, or search for Paid Tools.</li>
  <li> The slider filter button allows searching for the tools owned or maintained by the AsyncAPI organization. </li>
  <li> The <b>Language Filter</b> allows you to select the languages from the dropdown on which you want to search for Tools. </li>
  <li> The <b>Technology Filter</b> allows you to select the technologies from the dropdown on which you want to search for Tools. </li>
  <li> The <b>Clear Filters</b> button allows you to clear all filters inside the Filters Modal and will show you all the tools of selected categories (or all categories).</li>
</ol>
```

> Do remember to click on `Apply Filter` Button before closing the `Filters` Modal so that filters will be applied on the Dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Do remember to click on the `Apply Filter` Button before closing the `Filters` Modal so that filters will be applied on the Dashboard.
```

### Search Bar

The Search Bar will allow you to search the tools on the basis of their names.

## Summary

> This project is under my Mentorship program 2022 and was mentored by [Lukasz Gornicki](https://github.com/derberg) and [Maciej Urbańczyk](https://github.com/magicmatatjahu). It was an amazing experience to work in this project and create such an automation for AsyncAPI tools. Quite a good learning experience as I researched about GitHub APIs, JSON Schema, GitHub Actions and lot more stuff. Moreover, I became the maintainer of AsyncAPI website repository and started contributing to organization in lot many ways. My work in the project consists of following Pull Requests: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I completed this project during the 2022 AsyncAPI Mentorship program, mentored by [Lukasz Gornicki](https://github.com/derberg) and [Maciej Urbańczyk](https://github.com/magicmatatjahu). It was an amazing experience to work on this project and create an automation for AsyncAPI tools. Quite a good learning experience as I researched GitHub APIs, JSON Schema, GitHub Actions, and a lot more stuff. Moreover, I became a maintainer of the AsyncAPI website repository and started contributing to the organization in lot many ways. My work in the project consists of the following Pull Requests: 
```

- [feat: tools backend implementation](https://github.com/asyncapi/website/pull/939)
- [feat: added new /tools page](https://github.com/asyncapi/website/pull/940)
- [feat: manual tools added to the Tools Dashboard](https://github.com/asyncapi/website/pull/1191)

> You are welcomed to review my work in the program and I will love to get your feedbacks on this. You can contact me via [mail](mailto:akshatnema.official@gmail.com) or using DMs in [AsyncAPI Slack](https://asyncapi.com/slack-invite). Thanks to AsyncAPI and their community members for proividing me with this opportunity and I'll be looking for more such activities to contribute to the organization. Also, we are close to announce the next AsyncAPI Mentorship Program in year 2023 so stay tuned with us on [Slack](https://asyncapi.com/slack-invite).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You are welcome to review my work in the program and I will love to get your feedback on this. You can contact me via [my email](mailto:akshatnema.official@gmail.com) or DM me in [AsyncAPI Slack](https://asyncapi.com/slack-invite). Thank you to AsyncAPI and its community members for providing me with this opportunity and I'll be looking for more such activities to contribute to the organization. Also, we are close to announcing the next AsyncAPI Mentorship Program in the year 2023, so stay tuned with us on [AsyncAPI Slack](https://asyncapi.com/slack-invite).
```
